---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
identifier:
- scheme: ISBN
  text: 1576101746
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
---

# Acknowledgments

There are many people to thank—because this book was written over many
years, in many different settings, an unusually large number of people
have played a part in making this book possible. Thanks to Dan Illowsky
for not only contributing ideas and encouragement, but also getting me
started writing articles long ago, when I lacked the confidence to do it
on my own—and for teaching me how to handle the business end of things.
Thanks to Will Fastie for giving me my first crack at writing for a
large audience in the long-gone but still-missed *PC Tech Journal*, and
for showing me how much fun it could be in his even longer-vanished but
genuinely terrific column in *Creative Computing* (the most enjoyable
single column I have ever read in a computer magazine; I used to haunt
the mailbox around the beginning of the month just to see what Will had
to say). Thanks to Robert Keller, Erin O'Connor, Liz Oakley, Steve
Baker, and the rest of the cast of thousands that made *Programmer's
Journal* a uniquely fun magazine—especially Erin, who did more than
anyone to teach me the proper use of the English language. (To this day,
Erin will still patiently explain to me when one should use "that" and
when one should use "which," even though eight years of instruction on
this and related topics have left no discernible imprint on my brain.)
Thanks to Tami Zemel, Monica Berg, and the rest of the *Dr. Dobb's
Journal* crew for excellent, professional editing, and for just being
great people. Thanks to the Coriolis gang for their tireless hard work:
Jeff Duntemann, Kim Eoff, Jody Kent, Robert Clarfield, and Anthony
Stock. Thanks to Jack Tseng for teaching me a lot about graphics
hardware, and even more about how much difference hard work can make.
Thanks to John Cockerham, David Stafford, Terje Mathisen, the BitMan,
Chris Hecker, Jim Mackraz, Melvin Lafitte, John Navas, Phil Coleman,
Anton Truenfels, John Carmack, John Miles, John Bridges, Jim Kent, Hal
Hardenbergh, Dave Miller, Steve Levy, Jack Davis, Duane Strong, Daev
Rohr, Bill Weber, Dan Gochnauer, Patrick Milligan, Tom Wilson, Peter
Klerings, Dave Methvin, Mick Brown, the people in the ibm.pc/fast.code
topic on Bix, and all the rest of you who have been so generous with
your ideas and suggestions. I've done my best to acknowledge
contributors by name in this book, but if your name is omitted, my
apologies, and consider yourself thanked; this book could not have
happened without you. And, of course, thanks to Shay and Emily for their
generous patience with my passion for writing and computers.
