---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
identifier:
- scheme: ISBN
  text: 1576101746
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
---

# Foreword

I got my start programming on Apple II computers at school, and almost
all of my early work was on the Apple platform. After graduating, it
quickly became obvious that I was going to have trouble paying my rent
working in the Apple II market in the late eighties, so I was forced to
make a very rapid move into the Intel PC environment.

What I was able to pick up over several years on the Apple, I needed to
learn in the space of a few months on the PC.

The biggest benefit to me of actually making money as a programmer was
the ability to buy all the books and magazines I wanted. I bought a lot.
I was in territory that I knew almost nothing about, so I read
*everything* that I could get my hands on. Feature articles, editorials,
even advertisements held information for me to assimilate.

John Romero clued me in early to the articles by Michael Abrash. The
good stuff. Graphics hardware. Code optimization. Knowledge and wisdom
for the aspiring developer. They were even fun to read. For a long time,
my personal quest was to find a copy of Michael's first book, *Zen of
Assembly Language.* I looked in every bookstore I visited, but I never
did find it. I made do with the articles I could dig up.

I learned the dark secrets of the EGA video controller there, and
developed a few neat tricks of my own. Some of those tricks became the
basis for the Commander Keen series of games, which launched id
Software.

A year or two later, after Wolfenstein-3D, I bumped into Michael (in a
virtual sense) for the first time. I was looking around on M&T Online, a
BBS run by the Dr. Dobb's publishers before the Internet explosion, when
I saw some posts from the man himself. We traded email, and for a couple
months we played tag-team gurus on the graphics forum before Doom's
development took over my life.

A friend of Michael's at his new job put us back in touch with each
other after Doom began to make its impact, and I finally got a chance to
meet up with him in person.

I talked myself hoarse that day, explaining all the ins and outs of Doom
to Michael and an interested group of his coworkers. Every few days
afterwards, I would get an email from Michael asking for an elaboration
on one of my points, or discussing an aspect of the future of graphics.

Eventually, I popped the question—I offered him a job at id. "Just
think: no reporting to anyone, an opportunity to code all day, starting
with a clean sheet of paper. A chance to do *the right thing* as a
programmer." It didn't work. I kept at it though, and about a year later
I finally convinced him to come down and take a look at id. I was
working on Quake.

Going from Doom to Quake was a tremendous step. I knew where I wanted to
end up, but I wasn't at all clear what the steps were to get there. I
was trying a huge number of approaches, and even the failures were
teaching me a lot. My enthusiasm must have been contagious, because he
took the job.

Much heroic programming ensued. Several hundred thousand lines of code
were written. And rewritten. And rewritten. And rewritten.

In hindsight, I have plenty of regrets about various aspects of Quake,
but it is a rare person that doesn't freely acknowledge the technical
triumph of it. We nailed it. Sure, a year from now I will have probably
found a new perspective that will make me cringe at the clunkiness of
some part of Quake, but at the moment it still looks pretty damn good to
me.

I was very happy to have Michael describe much of the Quake technology
in his ongoing magazine articles. We learned a lot, and I hope we
managed to teach a bit.

When a non-programmer hears about Michael's articles or the source code
I have released, I usually get a stunned "WTF would you do that for???"
look.

They don't get it.

Programming is not a zero-sum game. Teaching something to a fellow
programmer doesn't take it away from you. I'm happy to share what I can,
because I'm in it for the love of programming. The Ferraris are just
gravy, honest!

This book contains many of the original articles that helped launch my
programming career. I hope my contribution to the contents of the later
articles can provide similar stepping stones for others.

—*John Carmack*\
 id Software
